---
title: Goals + plans = Software Engineer
date: "2019-05-07"
description: Dedicating time to study for Java certification = make a schedule.
---

In preparing for the change in programming focus, I sat down and wrote out my goals and steps to get there.

### Obtain a job in Software Engineering with Java or C# as the core within 6 months. The salary needs to be comparable to what I was making and on the rise. The overall focus is fullstack development with an emphasis on Java or C# as backends and Javascript (Angular or React) as the frontends.

- DMACC: Java Application Developer Certification
- Oracle: Java SE 8 Certification. Complete before Fall semester starts.
- Portfolio: My web site, Free Code Camp()
- Local opportunites to work or volunteer.
- Contribute to open source projects.
- Attend Meetups and community technology events.
- Create a blog and document the adventure.
- Job search.

### Why I want to change my focus

I have always loved programming. As a child I remember making a text game based on choosing directions and actions you could take. The game worked. I played it, friends played it, there wasn't much to it, but I _made_ it from BASIC (That's right: Beginner's All-purpose Symbolic Instruction Code) and a hobby was born. I had already switched careers from pharmacy to software development over 7 years ago, now I need to move from IBM i to a modern development platform. Now don't get me wrong. The IBM i is a fantastic machine, and it has its place in the IT world, but it _must_ be modernized. I have now been workinging in software development environments as a Software Developer for 4 years. I have written plenty of Java and C# during this time, but overall it wasn't the focus. So, when my company took a management turn and continued to drive down the old world path using old methods, I knew I had to change.

You can learn it on your own with the help of some courses.

At this point I knew I needed to have a goal. Especially since I am a single father of five, and 3 still live at home, and I need to work during this training. I don't want my learning to drag on and I knew I needed some incentives to push me forward, some pressures. This resulted in my goals.

##### Obtain a job in Software Engineering with Java or C# as the core within 6 months.

### My Plan

With my goal in place I need a plan to get there. I try to keep all my reading (except for an occasional break with one of my favorit authors, like Steinbeck) and ALL my my social reading, about development. I look for stories similar to mine and figure out what they did to succeed.

##### DMACC: Java Application Developer Certification

Next was to figure out how to get the knowledge I need. On April 25th, I decided to return to school at Des Moines Area Community College (DMACC). I applied, I already have a bachelors degree in pharmacy, and an Associates in Software Development, I'm in. I thought about taking some online courses (specifically something from a well-known college like Harvard), but ultimately decided staying local would benefit me more due to being able to ask questions face to face and establish relationships locally in development.

##### Oracle: Java SE 8 Certification. Complete before Fall semester starts.

I already know Java. I haven't written in it in a production role much, but did have a year of it when I went to ITT Tech (2013 - 2015, graduated). I need to be an expert in it. With the Oracle certification (one of the few certification I think is worth getting) and can start DMACC in Java II and finish in the Winter. I will supplement my training with some C# and Javascript to help with the fullstack goal.

##### Portfolio

I've been cranking out projects to throw on my website as a portfolio. This is a work in progress. This blog is created from React and Gatsby that I put in for myself both to practice Javascript and create this blog.

##### Local opportunites to work or volunteer.

I am looking for a good place to volunteer for programming. I have been so busy, this has taken a backseat to other priorities for the moment.

##### Contribute to open source projects.

Open source projects are a great way to learn and get noticed. I'm still sifting through some projects to find where I want to contribute. I would like to find something local.

##### Attend Meetups and community technology events.

I attend as many Meetups as I can. Java users group, .Net useres group, DevOps, etc. The Technology Association of Iowa (TAI) is another great place to go. I also met with Mandy McWerter from TAI to get some feedback on where I should focus my efforts. That was the convincing force needed to propel me into college and Java Certification.

##### Create a blog and document the adventure.

As I mentioned I leveraged Gatsby and React to put this blog up. It has been quite the learning experience in React, Git, GitHub, and web development. I'm learning something new every day. I am going to push my JS training as much as possible as it seems Angular and React (and other platforms like them) are here to stay. If you really want to be in demand, learn them, so I am! I try to blog every day. As time goes by, I hope to create a hub where people like myself(people switching careers learning software development) can go to get ideas and sources to learn. I'll not only blog this, but continuously modify my website to accomodate the infomation.

##### Job search.

This one is tough. I have talked to several people in the industry and had some interviews, but they all seem to want more Java (or C#) experience. You can't get that without the opportunity!! I'm ready and willing to work while going through the training over the next 6 months. Although I seem to find companies _saying_ they are willing to support you (I don't even care if they don't pay for the education, I just need them to understand I'm an experienced developer, just re-focusing on languages, and I CAN GET THE JOB DONE) they all seem to want more experience. Well, that's exactly what I'm trying to do. With this odd interaction taking place, I'm reluctant to go all out and apply for my dream jobs, then wind up fighting an up-hill battle later on when they dismiss you because you've already interviewed with them (but the future me will be much more educated, an expert in my areas) and they don't interview you again. So, I'm doing this with great caution. I would absolutely love to land the job of my dreams while still attending DMACC (like I said, I am an experienced developer). Whomever gets me has a diamond in the rough and will not be disappointed.
